.. include:: ../global.rst

******************
:lname:`Idio` Look
******************

:lname:`Scheme` looks like it can be used to program computers,
indeed, it looks like it can do far more in terms of programming
computers that we are used to or, more likely, capable of!  It is very
succinct with several key implementation details:

* closures, we can close over variables and use them in a function
  body

* anonymous functions, we can create functions on the fly

* functions are first class, we can construct and return them for
  others to call

* compound data types

* error handling

* macros, at least syntax transforming macros

* continuations, as a means of deriving exceptional behaviour they are
  required though whether we would want the full power of
  continuations available is debatable.  If we don't then users cannot
  create their own escape procedures -- remembering that we're meant
  to be writing a shell!

Variables might be introduced differently but are otherwise the same.
Data structures are broadly the same with a pair simply being the guts
of a linked list.

Calling functions is essentially no different, function followed by
arguments.

But, and I suppose it is the never ending bugbear of :lname:`Lisp`\ s,
it *looks a bit funny*.  However, thanks to syntax transformations, it
can *look like* whatever we want it to, so long as we can transform it
back into something the underlying :lname:`Scheme`-ish engine can
handle.

So, how should the language *look*?

Line-Oriented
=============

I'm quite content with my ALGOL-inspired syntax and with my shell hat
on, I want, nay, *insist* that I be able to type:

.. code-block:: idio

 ls -l

With no (obvious) punctuation, just like the shell.  Isn't that the
point?

Mind you, with our :lname:`Scheme` hats on, ``ls`` is *undefined* in
the program.  We know, with our shell hats on, that the shell will
take it upon itself to have a rummage around the shell's ``PATH`` to
find an ``ls`` executable.  In :lname:`Scheme`, though, we need to
break the behaviour that ``ls`` is undefined.

Similarly, for ``-l``.  Is that a funky function to subtract the value
of ``l`` from its argument or just a string of characters to be passed
as an argument to some command?  Tricky.

I like the idea that I can, at long last, have hyphens in my variable
names saving us from the thrall of underscores or CamelCase or
whatever -- albeit with the cost that whitespace is *required* to
distinguish between terms.  I can live with that, whitespace is
*cool*.

I like that other punctuation characters are available to add meaning
to my names, ``?`` and ``!``, and I have a cunning plan for accessing
structure fields with ``.`` in the Jinja_ way (my original inspiration
was :lname:`Perl`'s `Template::Toolkit
<http://www.template-toolkit.org/>`_).

However, there is an even worse bind we put ourselves under if we
allow punctuation characters in names as it conflicts with the
meta-characters the shell uses to spot pathname patterns:

.. code-block:: idio

 ls -l *foo*.txt

Is that:

* the variable ``*foo*.txt``?

* the variable ``*foo*``, a structure, where we want to access the
  field ``txt``?

* the variable ``*foo*``, an array where we want to access the
  ``txt``\ :sup:`th` element (``txt`` itself being a variable)?

* a pattern match expression to be passed to :manpage:`glob(3)`?

Hmm.

What if none of the above are true?  If ``*foo*`` (or ``*foo*.txt``)
is yet to be defined at the top level, say, then we have a *runtime*
decision to make which is not a good place to be if we are thinking
about any form of compilation.

I confess I'm at a bit of a loss here and I'm leaning in favour of a
consistent programming language over shell-ish conveniences.

For pathname matching I'm turning towards the idea that since we
intend that the result of a :manpage:`glob(3)` pattern match be a list
that we *preserve as a list* until it is required then perhaps we
should distinguish the pattern match that creates it.  Does something
like:

.. code-block:: idio

 ls -l #P{ *foo*.txt }

cause palpitations?  In one sense it is a bit like preparing a regular
expression in :lname:`Python` or :lname:`Perl`.

It's not *Art*, I agree.

There's a very similar problem with plain filenames:

.. code-block:: idio

 ls -l foo

``foo``, here, will be looked to be evaluated -- and could be --
otherwise will cause an *unbound* error like ``ls`` might.

As a transient feature most things that expect a filename will work
with a string (no globbing!):

.. code-block:: idio

 ls -l > "foo"
 open-input-file "foo"

Single Word Feature
-------------------

There is an outstanding feature which is a side-effect of the REPL.
If you command consists of a single word, eg. ``ls`` then it is
indistinguishable from a standard :lname:`Scheme`-ly REPL where any
single word will be evaluated and its value printed:

.. code-block:: idio

 Idio> n := 10
 Idio> n
 10
 Idio> map
 #<CLOS map @51321/0x30c4580/Idio>


giving us the value of ``n`` and some internal representation of the
closure, ``map``.
 
(Internal representations having no useful meaning possibly even to
developers.  Indeed, I had to look at the source to remind myself what
those values represent as I only really look at the ``CLOS`` part
telling me it is a closure.)

Which is what you want.  Well, it's what many people would expect from
an interactive :lname:`Lisp`\ y session.

Consequently, typing ``ls`` will get, um, ``ls`` printed back as it is
determined to be an undefined symbol where we choose, in an
un-:lname:`Scheme`-ly fashion, to simply print the symbol.

If you want to force the single word command ``ls`` to be invoked then
you *must* put it in parentheses:

.. code-block:: idio

 Idio> (ls)
 My Documents
 ...

That's true of functions as well:

.. code-block:: idio

 osh := (open-output-string)

It's quite annoying for me where I habitually type ``make`` at the
:lname:`Idio` prompt to have ``make`` printed back at me.  Not
helpful.  I've taken to typing ``make -k`` a lot more....

.. sidebox:: TBD

I don't *like* it.  I'm not sure what a better behaviour might be.

Complex Commands
----------------

There's another awkwardness from the idea of a line-oriented shell for
complex functions, ones that have multiple clauses.  Take, ``cond``,
for example, which is nominally:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (cond (c1 e1)
       (c2 e2)
       (else e3))

``cond`` by rights, should be invokable in the same way as ``ls``,
ie. without leading parenthesis but that would lead us with:

.. code-block:: scheme

 cond (c1 e1)
      (c2 e2)
      (else e3)

which our line-oriented engine is going to see as three distinct
statements -- albeit with the second two having exaggerated indents.

:lname:`Python` supports the idea of indented code -- indeed you can
see references to *indent* and *deindent* in the parser -- but it
doesn't feel like the indentation here is a syntactic thing, it's
really a visual *aide-m√©moir*, after all, we could have written:

.. code-block:: scheme

 cond (c1 e1) (c2 e2) (else e3)

and be done.  Except the condition and expression clauses are almost
certainly complex and the resultant enormous line would be difficult
to read let alone maintain.

The original ``(cond ...)`` across multiple lines works because the
:lname:`Scheme`-ish engine is looking for the matching close-parens
and so will consume all lines until it gets it.

For our "unwrapped" ``cond``, we can use a regular shell-ish line
continuation character:

.. code-block:: idio

 cond (c1 e1) \
      (c2 e2) \
      (else e3)

But, be honest, it looks a bit clumsy.  And I can say that with some
confidence as I have, out of a duty to see it through, written *all*
the complex multi-clause forms use this style.  (What an *idiot*!  I
sense growing sagacity of the language name...).  This gives us the
dreadful:

.. code-block:: idio

 if (some test) \
    (truth-fully) \
    (not so truthy)

I know, I know!  (And it gets worse.)

Of course, you *can* continue to use the wrapping parenthesis -- all
that the non-wrapped line is doing is having the wrapping parenthesis
silently added -- but the result is like the `Curate's egg`_:

.. code-block:: idio

 ls -l
 (if (some test)
    (truth-fully)
    (not so truthy))

and, to be honest, I find it less appealing than the clumsy variant.
The line-continuation style has the decency to be consistent.

Infix Operators
===============

There is the issue of infix operators, ``|`` and arithmetic operators
amongst a plethora of others.

I think there's a trick we can pull here following in the footsteps of
the reader macros for ``quote`` and friends.

Suppose we have a means to declare a symbol as an infix operator
together with some behavioural code.  Then, after the reader has read
the whole line/parenthetical expression in, it goes back and looks to
see if any of the words are an infix operator.  This is much like
macros where the evaluator goes and looks for macros and behaves
differently except we are running this before reaching the evaluator.

So, if I had typed:

.. code-block:: idio

 zcat file | tar tf -

then the reader will have read in six words in a(n implied) list.  It
can scan along, find that ``|`` is an infix operator and call its
behavioural code.  I'll assume we're all happy that it wants to rework
this into:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (| (zcat file)
    (tar tf -))

.. sidebox:: Always a good position.

which is a simple list transformation requiring no knowledge of
anything.

After this transformation, ``|`` is in functional position
and so the evaluator will expect it to be the name of a function.

Had someone typed the second form in directly then the reader would
have left it alone as the thing that *looks* like an infix operator
can't be, because it's the first element in the list.  An infix
operator (surely?) has to have something before it to be *in*\ fix.

Recall I suggested that this happens in the reader for parenthetical
expressions so that if you'd typed:

.. code-block:: idio

 zcat file | (tar tf - | grep foo)

(I'm leaving ``foo`` in there as it fails my point about symbols and
expansion but is easier to read whilst we mull over the idea.)

Although we start reading ``zcat file ...``, the first *complete*
parenthetical expression read would be ``(tar tf - | grep foo)`` which
can be re-written as:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (| (tar tf -)
    (grep foo))

to become part of the outer line-oriented expression when it is
eventually completely read in (by hitting the end of line):

.. code-block:: idio

 zcat file | (| (tar tf -)
		(grep foo))

This time, even though there's a ``|`` in the middle of the second
expression it isn't directly in the outer expression which looks, to
the reader, like:

.. parsed-literal:: 

 *rhubarb* *rhubarb* | *rhubarb* *rhubarb*

.. aside:: I should be careful of referencing 1970s British TV comedy
           for fear of attracting :ref-title:`The Phantom Raspberry
           Blower of Old London Town`!

and can be transformed into:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (| (zcat file)
    (| (tar tf -)
       (grep foo)))

Contrast that with multiple instances of the operator in the same
expression:

.. code-block:: idio

 zcat ... | tar ... | grep ...

which we might transform into:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (| (zcat ...) 
    (tar ...) 
    (grep ...))

It's more subtle than that, though, as a pipeline (and the logical
operators ``and`` and ``or``) take multiple words as their arguments,
*including other operators*, yet arithmetic operators (and IO
redirection) take only a single argument either side.

:lname:`Scheme` might allow:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (+ 1 2 3)

but

.. code-block:: idio

 1 + 2 3

is incorrect in regular arithmetic.  That means that the code for
operators needs to do some syntax checking.  It's not great that
syntax checking is happening in the reader but, hey ho.  Let's run
with it.

To complicate matters, ``+`` and ``-`` are commonly unary operators as
well as binary ones: ``- n`` should return negative ``n`` (noting that
``-n`` is a symbol!).

Operator Associativity
----------------------

The arithmetic operators have *associativity*, that is ``1 - 2 - 3`` is
equivalent to ``(1 - 2) - 3`` as ``-`` is left-associative.  ``+`` is,
mathematically, non-associative although usually defined in
programming languages as left-associative.  Assignment is
right-associative -- evaluate the value first!

Pipelines are left associative, hence the triple pipeline example is
quite likely to be *executed* as:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (| (| (zcat ...) 
       (tar ...) 
    (grep ...)))

Even if its nominal form is all three children parented by the same
``|`` operator.

Operator Precedence
-------------------

There's also *precedence*: ``(1 + 2 * 3)`` could be ``((1 + 2) * 3)``
or ``(1 + (2 * 3))`` depending on which operator was run first.

Logical operators, pipelines, arithmetic, logical operators and IO
redirection are all ordered by precedence:

.. code-block:: idio

 tar *.txt 2>/dev/null | gzip > foo || echo whoops

should be interpreted as first ``pipeline || pipeline``, then ``cmd+io
| cmd+io`` then, finally, arrange ``io`` followed by executing
``cmd``.  Hence we might derive:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (or (| (io-> 2 /dev/null
 	      tar *.txt)
        (io-> 1 foo
 	      gzip))
     echo whoops)

using some putative ``(io-> fd file cmd . args)`` function to handle
IO redirection (which doesn't handle multiple redirections so doesn't
exist).

Notice no :manpage:`execve(3)` function has been introduced as, at
this stage, we don't know if ``tar`` and ``gzip`` are internal
functions or external commands.  All we're doing is rewriting the
statements involving infix operators.

The Reader and Infix Operators
------------------------------

Such transforms will also mean that:

.. code-block:: idio

 echo 1 + 2 3 * 4

will be re-written as:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (echo (+ 1 2) (* 3 4))
 
resulting in:

.. code-block:: sh

 3 12

but the original form was hard for the human mind to scan -- the
pedantic grouping of sub-expressions of :lname:`Scheme` would have
forced us to write:

.. code-block:: idio

 echo (1 + 2) (3 * 4)

which is, at least, clearer in intent!

It's not uncommon to have multiple clauses in a logical statement,
drawn out over multiple lines for clarity:

.. code-block:: idio

 if (this and
     that and
     the-other) \
    ...

So I feel that if the last word on a line is an infix operator then
the expression is assumed to continue on the next line.

That said, I've gotten quite used to writing the more
:lname:`Scheme`-ly:

.. code-block:: idio

 if (and this
	 that
	 the-other) \
    ...

but the trailing operator trick stills stands.

Operator Overloading
--------------------

"Operator overloading" is a fan favourite in other languages -- which
is another way of saying, heavily controversial.

Think ``+`` is just about adding integers together?  It's common
enough to appear as string concatenation and so I guess people would
be happy enough to see it used for any kind of append operation
(lists, arrays, hashes(?)).

Our infix operators are blind to your types, though.  They simply
massage lists into another form.  You'll be wanting function
overloading which means :ref:`generic functions`.

Operator Summary
----------------

I think this reader macro trick has some mileage.


Lexical Blocks
==============

If you're a :lname:`Scheme`\ r, you're quite used to:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (let ((a 1))
   (+ a 1))

whereas others would be more at home with a more :lname:`ALGOL`-ish:

.. code-block:: idio

 {
   a = 1
   a + 1
 }

where ``{`` starts a lexical block in which we can introduce lexically
scoped variables.  They would likely all be introduced as a ``let*``
or ``letrec`` type as that's the sort of behaviour non-\
:lname:`Scheme`\ rs would expect where we can have one variable
derived from another:

.. code-block:: idio

 {
   a = 1
   b = a + 1
   
   odd? = function ... even? ...
   even? = function ... odd? ...
 }

Additionally, the lexical block has an implied ``begin`` meaning the
last calculated value is the one to be returned by the block.

The reader is intent on matching bracket-type things so will read
multiple lines -- handily, the lexical block's body -- to get the
closing ``}``.


They sound quite handy for :ref:`functions`.

Assignment
==========

I like the idea of ``define`` to force the user to declare names --
and we'll see the (pedantic :lname:`Scheme`\ ly) reasons why later --
however I think we generally prefer the ``=`` style.

I was thinking of some way to avoid the ``=``/``==`` mistakes
prevalent in :lname:`C` and started off thinking that a
:lname:`Pascal`-style ``:=`` would come in handy.  We can also make it
an infix operator ([confident narrator voice] *...we have the
technology...*):

.. code-block:: idio

 a := 1
 ...

would be transformed by the reader into ``(:= a 1)`` and then the
evaluator can introduce the variable ``a`` giving it the value 1.
Technically, in the underlying :lname:`Scheme`-ish engine that's going
to be a ``define`` or a ``let``.  In a lexical block, for example:

.. code-block:: idio

 {
  a := 1
  ...
  a
 }

would get transformed into:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (let ((a 1))
  (begin
   ...
   a)

in other words, after any ``:=`` statement, the entire rest of the
lexical block becomes the body of the implied ``let`` such that the
``let*``-ish:

.. code-block:: idio

 a := 1
 b := a + 2
 ...
 b

would get transformed into:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (let ((a 1))
  (let ((b (a + 2)))
   (begin
    ...
    b))

which, I think, works OK.

I have, however, failed in my visual-distinction task in that to
"modify" ``a`` we use regular ``=``:

.. code-block:: idio

 a := 1
 ...
 a = a + 1

Noting that the *reader* will transform ``a + 1`` into ``(+ a 1)``
*first* as ``+`` has a higher infix operator precedence than the
``=``:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (= a (+ a 1))

Function calls
--------------

Function calls in assignments come out in the wash, here, as:

.. code-block:: idio

 a = func sole bruvva

is transformed into:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (= a (func sole bruvva))

and ``(func sole bruvva)`` is a regular evaluable form returning its
result to the assignment operator, ``=``.

We *are* still stuck with the single word feature as described above
so you need to type:

.. code-block:: idio

 a = (func)

if you're not passing any arguments.  *\*shrugs\**

Top Level Assignments
---------------------

Defining variables at the top level, ie. outside of a lexical block,
comes in a couple of forms.

``define`` has two forms itself:

.. parsed-literal::

 define *variable* *value*

 define (*func-name* *formals+*) *body*

or you can use one of the assignment infix operators:

.. parsed-literal::

 *variable* := *value*

 *function-name* := function (*formals+*) *body*

The ``define`` form for functions is much cleaner but the assignment
variant is used liberally when re-defining an existing function.

Non-lexical Variables
---------------------

We want to get to handling environment variables seamlessly which I've
been suggesting are a kind of tagged dynamic variable.

Dynamic Variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Dynamic variables "live on the stack", that is to say that their
existence is dependent on the code path you have run and as your
function call hierarchy unwinds the dynamic variables disappear.
Access to the variable is more work because you need to run back up
(down?) through the stack looking for your transient variable.

(This idea is reused -- probably a bit too much!)

Nominally, there's the ``dynamic-let`` call which introduces a dynamic
variable (onto the stack) and starts processing:

.. code-block:: scheme

 (dynamic-let ((X 10))
  (foo))

Normally, some function calls deeper, you would call ``(dynamic X)``
to get the value of ``X``, your dynamic variable.

Obviously, you don't want to be asking for a dynamic variable in some
random bit of code on the off-chance.  You're meant to know what
you're doing!

Digressing a little, there is a mechanism in the evaluator to keep
track of variable names which can keep track of the lexical or dynamic
nature of a variable -- by remembering what kind of form introduced
it.  Subsequently, if we were to reference ``X`` we would know it was
a dynamic variable and can therefore replace the variable reference,
``X`` with ``(dynamic X)`` -- essentially to provoke the stack-walking
mechanism -- and all is good.

Back to our variable initialisation.

.. sidebox:: *Genius!*

We have ``:=`` for lexical assignments, how about ``:~`` for dynamic
variables?  ``~`` representing the maybe, maybe not dynamic nature of
the beastie.

Environment Variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Environment variables are much more shell-ish.  I'm suggesting we want
to implement them in a similar fashion, as an "environment" variable
with a dynamic nature.  They are different to dynamic variables in
that whenever a program is executed it will have an environment
created which is built from any extant "environment" variables.

.. sidebox:: Look, it's just a little bit of technical debt that, when
             we get round to it, we can apply the extra experience
             we'll have picked up in the meanwhile to do a better
             refactoring job.

	     What's not to like?

It could be implemented by tagging some dynamic variables as
"environment" variables or it could be implemented as an entirely
parallel and separate set of dynamic variables.  *\*cough\**

The reason for this dynamic nature is I want to be able to say:

.. code-block:: idio

 {
  PATH := path-prepend PATH /some/where/else

  do stuff
 }

Here, for the duration of this lexical block, ie. whatever effect we
create should be unwound at the end of the block, I am creating a
*new* PATH variable which should be used by anyone looking up the
``PATH`` environment variable if, say, they want to find an
executable.

After this lexical block people can find the old value.

.. sidebox::  *Stop it, please!*

I'm thinking ``:*`` here, with ``*`` signifying the stars, the
*environment* surrounding us!

So that should have been:

.. code-block:: idio

 {
  PATH :* path-prepend PATH /some/where else

  do stuff
 }

You might ask why didn't I just modify the value of ``PATH``?  Well,
modifying it means that everyone after this lexical block will see my
transient changes unless I ensure that I can unwind the changes
manually before I'm done.

:socrates:`Even on error and in the face of continuations?`  Hmmm, "tricky."

Of course, modifying ``PATH``, say, for everyone following is
perfectly normal we're just covering the variable assignment prefix
case of:

.. code-block:: sh

 PATH=/some/where/else:$PATH do stuff

Un-setting Transient Variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There is another corner case where you might want to unset dynamic
variables, possibly transiently, and almost always for environment
variables.

For that we need to add a stack marker that says: stop looking any
further and return "failed to find".

We need to kind of indication we're stomping on the normal way of
things so I'm penning in ``!~`` and ``!*`` for dynamic and environment
variables respectively.

Computed Variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There's another class of shell variables we want to emulate.  Remember
``SECONDS`` which returns us the number of seconds the shell has been
running for?  (There's ``$^T`` in :lname:`Perl` as well.)

There's clearly a bit of magic there where the simple access of a
variable has resulted in a (hidden) function call.

I'm calling these *computed variables* (not least because many others
have done so before).

It would be neat if we could allow the user to create these.
``SECONDS``, mind, is probably one for the language implementer as it
requires something in the language bootstrap to start the clock
rolling!

There's another twist for computed variables.  They might be
read-only, like ``SECONDS`` for which it makes no sense to assign a
value to them.  They might be write-only like :manpage:`srandom(3)`,
the seeding mechanism for :manpage:`random(3)` where it defeats the
purpose to get back that secret seed value.  It might be read-write
like the shell's ``RANDOM`` (which combines the behaviour of both
``srandom`` and ``random``).

If the user is defining a computed variable then they must pass two
parameters to the initialisation: a getter and a setter.  If you want
it to be read-only pass ``#n`` (aka. ``nil``) for the setter.  Pass
``#n`` for the getter for a write-only variable.  Passing ``#n`` for
both should result in an error -- *stop being annoying!*

.. sidebox:: *Oh, puh-lease!*

As for the infix operation/function name, try ``:$`` for size!

We can then rustle up something like:

.. code-block:: idio

 getter := #f
 setter := #f

 {
  p := 0

  getter = function () {
	     p = p + 1
	     p
  }

  setter = function (v) {
	     p = v
  }
 } 

 cv :$ getter setter

 printf "%d %d\n" cv cv
 cv = 10
 printf "%d %d\n" cv cv

which should display:

.. code-block:: sh

 1 2
 11 12


.. _functions:

Functions
=========

Of course, functions could change very little from how they exist
now:

.. code-block:: sh

 function foo ()
 {
  echo $(( $1 + 1));
 }

other than a little textual transformation into, say:

.. code-block:: idio

 function (a) {
   b = a + 1
   b
 }

the differences being that there's no function name in the function
declaration and we have formal parameters.

Notice too the start of a lexical block, ``{``, *on the end of the
first line* of the function declaration.  That means our line-oriented
reader will continue reading through to the matching ``}`` thus
creating the function body.

If it wasn't on the end of that line:

.. code-block:: idio

 function (a)
 {
   b = a + 1
   b
 }

would be a semantic error as ``function (a)`` was read and deemed by
the line-oriented code reader to be a whole expression.  But it a
function declaration with no body so is an error.  The remaining
lexical block is, well, just a lexical block.  That's legal.

.. sidebox:: Haters gonna hate!

I like the ``{`` on the end of the line as it is, by and large, the
way I write code anyway.  Others will, no doubt, be very angry.

Functional Block
----------------

:lname:`Ruby` and :lname:`Swift` both allow a block to take formal
arguments thus allowing an alternate form of creating anonymous
closures:

.. code-block:: ruby

 { |n| n + 1 }		; Ruby

.. code-block:: swift

 { (n) in n + 1 }	; Swift - could have said { $0 + 1 }

The more you're used to seeing it the easier it is to scan.

I'm not so tied to the idea, though.

Pipelines
=========

We're fairly happy, I think, that we should have regular shell-ish
pipelines:

.. code-block:: idio

 zcat file | tar tf -

I've not implemented it yet -- partly because ``&`` is used for pairs
-- but you can image a form of postfix operator, ``&`` to background a
pipeline, like the shell:

.. code-block:: idio

 zcat file | tar tf - &

Previously I said I was going to reserve the :lname:`C`/shell logical
operators ``&&`` and ``||`` for nefarious purposes.

Again, not implemented, but I'm thinking that ``||`` is more of an
object pipeline -- so, like PowerShell_ and friends -- we might be
able to create some functional composition/comprehension/cascade
(there must be a proper term) where the value returned by one function
call is the argument to the next:

.. code-block:: idio

 func args || f2 || f3

although you immediately think that the later functions should be
allowed to have arguments themselves (albeit they could be the result
of currying themselves and only take a single argument) in which case
you'd need some symbolic argument for the value being passed down.
:lname:`Perl` used to use ``$_`` for the anonymous value so something
like:

.. code-block:: idio

 func args || f2 a1 _ a2 || f3 _ b1 b2

However it might be done, you can recognise that it is a
straight-forward enough transformation into a nested call:

.. code-block:: idio

 (f3 (f2 a1 (func args) a2) b1 b2)

On a different tack, ``&&``, might be used to "kick off in the
background" a thread (should we have any):

.. code-block:: idio

 keep-an-eye-on stuff &&

This double-punctuation character thing might have some mileage.

How about ``>>`` to collect "output" in a string?  Of course, ``>>``
is the append variant of ``>`` for (pipeline) IO redirection.  That's
a bit unfortunate.

I appear to have lost my reference but I thought I'd seen some
alternate IO redirection forms, eg. ``>+`` might be used for append
and ``>=`` with an offset might be used to :manpage:`fseek(3)`
somewhere in a file before writing.




